=head1 NAME

Catalyst::Manual::Tutorial::Appendices - Catalyst Tutorial - Part 9: Appendices


=head1 OVERVIEW

This is B<Part 9 of 9> of the Catalyst tutorial.

L<Tutorial Overview|Catalyst::Manual::Tutorial>

=over 4

=item 1

L<Introduction|Catalyst::Manual::Tutorial::Intro>

=item 2

L<Catalyst Basics|Catalyst::Manual::Tutorial::CatalystBasics>

=item 3

L<Basic CRUD|Catalyst::Manual::Tutorial_BasicCRUD>

=item 4

L<Authentication|Catalyst::Manual::Tutorial::Authentication>

=item 5

L<Authorization|Catalyst::Manual::Tutorial::Authorization>

=item 6

L<Debugging|Catalyst::Manual::Tutorial::Debugging>

=item 7

L<Testing|Catalyst::Manual::Tutorial::Testing>

=item 8

L<AdvancedCRUD|Catalyst::Manual::Tutorial::AdvancedCRUD>

=item 9

B<Appendices>

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This part of the tutorial provides supporting information relevant to
the Catalyst tutorial.

=head1 APPENDIX 1: CUT AND PASTE FOR POD-BASED EXAMPLES

You may notice that Pod indents example code with four spaces.  This
section provides some quick advice to "un-indent" this text in common
editors.

=head2 "Un-indenting" with Vi/Vim

When cutting and pasting multi-line text from Pod-based documents, the
following vi/vim regexs can be helpful to "un-indent" the inserted text
(do NOT type the quotes, they are only included to show spaces in the
regex patterns).  I<Note that all 3 of the regexs end in 4 spaces>:

=over 4

=item * 

":0,$s/^    "

Removes four leading spaces from the entire file (from the first line,
C<0>, to the last line, C<$>).

=item * 

"%$s/^    "

A shortcut for the previous item (C<%> specifies the entire file; so
this removes four leading spaces from every line).

=item * 

":.,$s/^    "

Removes the first four spaces from the line the cursor is on at the time
the regex command is executed (".") to the last line of the file.

=item * 

":.,44s/^    "

Removes four leading space from the current line through line 44
(obviously adjust the C<44> to the appropriate value in your example).

=back

=head2 "Un-indenting" with Emacs

B<TODO>

=head1 APPENDIX 2: USING MYSQL AND POSTGRESQL

The main database used in this tutorial is the very simple yet powerful
SQLite.  This section provides information that can be used to "convert"
the tutorial to use MySQL and PostgreSQL.  However, note that part of
the beauty of the MVC architecture is that very little database-specific
code is spread throughout the system (at least when MVC is "done
right").  Consequently, converting from one database to another is
relatively painless with most Catalyst applications.  In general, you
just need to adapt the schema definition C<.sql> file you use to
initialize your database and adjust a few configuration parameters.

Also note that the purpose of the data definition statements for this
section are not designed to take maximum advantage of the various
features in each database for issues such as referential integrity and
field types/constraints.

=head2 MySQL

B<TODO>

=head2 PostgreSQL

B<TODO>


=head1 APPENDIX 3: IMPROVED HASHING SCRIPT

Here is an improved SHA-1 hashing script from Gavin Henry that does
not expose the passwords to "capture" on the command line.

    #!/usr/bin/perl -w
    #===============================================================================
    #
    #         FILE:  enc_pass.pl
    #
    #        USAGE:  ./enc_pass.pl
    #
    #  DESCRIPTION:  Encrypt a Password using SHA-1
    #
    #      OPTIONS:  ---
    # REQUIREMENTS:  ---
    #         BUGS:  ---
    #        NOTES:  ---
    #       AUTHOR:  Gavin Henry (GH), <ghenry@suretecsystems.com>
    #      COMPANY:  Suretec Systems Ltd.
    #      VERSION:  1.0
    #      CREATED:  26/06/2006
    #     REVISION:  ---
    #    COPYRIGHT:  http://search.cpan.org/dist/perl/pod/perlgpl.pod
    #===============================================================================
    
    use strict;
    use warnings;
    use Digest::SHA1;
    use Term::ReadKey;
    
    sub get_pass {
        ReadMode 'noecho';
        chomp( my $pw = ReadLine 0 );
        ReadMode 'normal';
        return $pw;
    }
    
    print "Enter the password to be encrypted: ";
    my $pass = get_pass();
    
    print "\nConfirm the password: ";
    my $verify = get_pass();
    
    if ( $pass eq $verify ) {
        my $sha1_enc = Digest::SHA1->new;
        $sha1_enc->add($pass);
    
        print "\nYour encrypted password is: "
          . $sha1_enc->hexdigest . "\n"
          . "Paste this into your SQL INSERT/COPY Data.\n";
    }
    else {
        print "\nPasswords do not match!\n";
    }



=head1 AUTHOR

Kennedy Clark, C<hkclark@gmail.com>

Please report any errors, issues or suggestions to the author.  The
most recent version of the Catlayst Tutorial can be found at
L<http://dev.catalyst.perl.org/repos/Catalyst/trunk/Catalyst-Runtime/lib/Catalyst/Manual/Tutorial/>.

Copyright 2006, Kennedy Clark, under Creative Commons License
(L<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/2.5/>).
