=head1 NAME

Catalyst::Manual::Installation::CentOS4 - Catalyst Installation on CentOS 4



=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document provides directions on how to install CentOS 4 (a rebuild
of RedHat Enterprise 4) and then install Catalyst.

If you already have a functioning install of CentOS, RHEL, or a
comparable Linux OS, you should be able to skip this first section and
go straight to the C<INSTALL CATALYST> section.

B<NOTE:> You might want to consult the latest version of this document.  It
is available at:
L<http://dev.catalyst.perl.org/repos/Catalyst/trunk/Catalyst-Runtime/lib/Catalyst/Manual/Installation/CentOS4.pod>



=head1 INSTALL CENTOS

These directions are written for CentOS 4.4 on an i386 machine; however,
you can substitute other versions as they become available.


=over 4

=item * 

Go to L<http://isoredirect.centos.org/centos/4/isos/i386/> and click the
nearest mirror.

=item * 

Download C<CentOS-4.4-i386-bin1of4.iso> (you only need the first disk).

=item * 

Burn the .iso to CD.

=item * 

Insert the CD into your machine and power it up.

=item * 

Hit C<Enter> at the C<boot:> prompt.

=item * 

CD media test: you can either select C<OK> or C<Skip> depending on
whether or not you trust your burn.

=item * 

The installation GUI should start.  Click next at the "Welcome to
CentOS-4" screen.

=item * 

Select a language and click C<Next>.

=item * 

Select a keyboard configuration and click C<Next>.

=item * 

Select C<Custom> for the installation type and click C<Next>.

=item * 

Leave C<Automatically partition> selected on the C<Disk Partitioning
Setup> and click C<Next>.

=item * 

Uncheck C<Review (and modify if needed) the partitions created>, but
leave the rest of the default settings on the C<Automatic Partitioning>
screen.  Then click C<Next>.

=item * 

Click C<Yes> at the C<Are you sure you want to do this?> warning.

=item * 

Click C<Next> on the C<Boot Loader Configuration> screen.

=item * 

Update the C<Network Configuration> screen as necessary and click C<Next>.

=item * 

Check C<Remote Login (SSH)> and click C<Next> on the C<Firewall
Configuration> screen.

=item * 

Select additional languages as necessary.  Click C<Next>.

=item * 

Select the appropriate time zone and click C<Next>.

=item * 

Enter a root password and click C<Next>.

=item * 

Scroll to the bottom of the C<Package Group Selection> screen and check
C<Minimal> (the last option).  Click C<Next>.

=item * 

Click C<Next> at the C<About to Install> screen.

=item * 

The installation will prepare the hard drive and then install the
required rpm packages.

=item * 

Once the installation completes, remove the CD and click C<Reboot>.

=item * 

Type C<vi /etc/sysconfig/iptables> and add the following line as the
third to last line of the file (I<above> the C<-A RH-Firewall-1-INPUT -j
REJECT --reject-with icmp-host-prohibited> line):

    -A RH-Firewall-1-INPUT -m state --state NEW -m tcp -p tcp --dport 3000 -j ACCEPT

This will allow Catalyst to make use of port 3000 (the default for the
development server).

Type C<service iptables restart> to restart the iptables firewall using
the updated configuration.

=item * 

Type C<yum -y update> to retrieve the latest patches.

=back


=head1 INSTALL CATALYST

=over 4

=item * 

Type C<yum -y install gcc expat-devel sqlite3> to install several
packages used by Catalyst.

=item * 

Type the following:

    $ perl -MCPAN -e shell
    
    ...
    
    Are you ready for manual configuration? [yes] yes
    The following questions are intended to help you with the
    
    ...
    
    cpan shell -- CPAN exploration and modules installation (v1.7601)
    ReadLine support available (try 'install Bundle::CPAN')
        
    cpan> force install Module::Build
    
    ...
    
    cpan> quit

=item *

B<Note:> You need to have CPAN manually configured prior to running
cat-install.  As shown above, you should automatically receive
a prompt for this when you first run C<perl -MCPAN -e shell>.  You
can re-run the configuration script by typing C<o conf init> at the
C<cpanE<gt>> prompt.

B<Optional:> The remaining steps of the installation could run 
significantly faster if you configure a fast mirror that uses HTTP vs. 
FTP (both transfer data at the same rate once the transfer is in 
progress, but HTTP connects much more quickly... and a Catalyst 
installation involves many connections).  If you want to change the 
selection(s) you made during the "manual configuration" process above, 
you can manually add a single URL.  To prepend a new URL to the B<front> 
of the list, use the C<unshift> option to C<o conf>:

    cpan> o conf urllist unshift http://www.perl.com/CPAN/

Where C<http://www.perl.com/CPAN/> is replaced by a nearby, HTTP-based 
mirror.  You can get a list of all mirrors (including where they are 
located, their bandwidth, and their update frequency) at 
L<http://www.perl.com/CPAN/MIRRORED.BY>.

Then, be sure to save your changes (or they will be lost the next
time you restart the CPAN shell):

    cpan> o conf commit

You can view the current settings with C<o conf urllist> (or just
C<o conf> to view all settings):

    cpan> o conf urllist
        urllist           
            http://www.perl.com/CPAN/
    Type 'o conf' to view configuration edit options
 
Note that multiple values can be entered for the C<urllist> option (the
first entry will be used as long as it responds).

=item * 

Review the C<cat-install> documentation from the 
L<http://www.shadowcatsystems.co.uk> web site:
    
    If you want to get started quickly with Catalyst, Shadowcat provides an 
    installer script that will automate most of the process of installing it 
    for you. Please bear in mind that this script is currently considered 
    beta quality; we don't think it will eat your system but we make no 
    guarantee of that.
    
    First, you'll need -
    
        * Perl, 5.8.1+ (if you're on windows, get it from Active State)
        * make of some sort. On unix/linux you should already have one. On 
            windows get nmake from Microsoft.
        * A compiler. On unix/linux you should already have one. On windows, 
            get the latest Dev-C++ beta.
        * All three of the above in your PATH for whatever shell you're using
        * A configured CPAN.pm. perl -MCPAN -e shell should get CPAN to walk 
            you through the configuration process
        * Module::Build. Active State kindly include this for you.
    
    Ok, now that your environment is set up, download the installer from 
    this link, open a command prompt in the directory you downloaded it to 
    and run perl cat-install. By the time it exits, you should have a full 
    Catalyst install.
    
    If anything goes wrong, please send the full build log and the output of 
    perl -V to cat-install (at) shadowcatsystems.co.uk so we can try and 
    resolve your issue.


=item * 

Type C<wget http://www.shadowcatsystems.co.uk/static/cat-install> to
retrieve a copy of the C<cat-install> script.

=item * 

Type C<vi cat-install> to open the installer script, then insert the
following lines at the bottom of the file (after the
C<install('Catalyst');> line):

    install('ExtUtils::ParseXS');
    install('Digest::SHA1');
    install('Digest::SHA');
    install('DBIx::Class');
    install('DBIx::Class::HTMLWidget');
    install('Module::ScanDeps');
    install('Module::CoreList');
    install('PAR::Dist');
    install('Archive::Tar');
    install('Module::Install');
    install('Catalyst::Devel');
    install('Catalyst::Plugin::ConfigLoader');
    install('Catalyst::Plugin::Session');
    install('Catalyst::Plugin::Session::State::Cookie');
    install('Catalyst::Plugin::Session::Store::FastMmap');
    install('Catalyst::Plugin::Authorization::ACL');
    install('Catalyst::Plugin::Authentication');
    install('Catalyst::Plugin::Authorization::Roles');
    install('Catalyst::Plugin::Authentication::Store::DBIC');
    install('Catalyst::Plugin::DefaultEnd');
    install('Catalyst::Plugin::StackTrace');
    install('Catalyst::Plugin::Dumper');
    install('Catalyst::Plugin::HTML::Widget');
    install('Catalyst::Model::DBIC::Schema');
    install('Catalyst::View::TT');
    install('Test::WWW::Mechanize');
    install('Test::WWW::Mechanize::Catalyst');
    install('Test::Pod');
    install('Test::Pod::Coverage');

=item * 

Type C<perl cat-install>.  It will take a while to complete.

Tip: You may want to enable logging of the output that C<cat-install>
generates as it runs -- it can be useful if you need to troubleshoot
a failure.  The log will generate almost 1 MB of output.

Note: Once the C<perl cat-install> is complete, you may want to rerun the 
command to check the status of the packages listed in <cat-install>. Ideally, 
everything should return a I<name> C<is up to date> message.  If any packages 
try to re-install, the you could need to manually install the package with the 
C<force> option.  Also, look for new optional dependences that C<cat-install> 
was not able to automatically handle. You can address these by manually 
installing the dependency and then re-running C<perl cat-install>.  

In some cases you may wish to install an earlier version of a module.  For
example, say that the latest version of Module::Install is 0.64 and you
want to install 0.63.  The following command under C<perl -MCPAN -e shell>:

    cpan> install A/AD/ADAMK/Module-Install-0.63.tar.gz

=back

You should now have a functioning Catalyst installation with the modules
and plugins required to run the Catalyst tutorial.


=head1 TESTING THE INSTALLATION

=over 4

=item *

Download the tarball of the final tutorial application:

    $ wget http://dev.catalyst.perl.org/repos/Catalyst/trunk/examples/Tutorial/Final_Tarball/MyApp.tgz

=item *

Untar it:

    $ tar zxvf MyApp.tgz
    $ cd MyApp

=item *

Run the tests:

    $ CATALYST_DEBUG=0 prove --lib lib  t
    t/02pod...............skipped
            all skipped: set TEST_POD to enable this test
    t/03podcoverage.......skipped
            all skipped: set TEST_POD to enable this test
    t/01app...............ok                                                     
    t/controller_Login....ok                                                     
    t/live_app01..........ok 1/0[debug] ***Root::auto User not found, forwarding to /login
    t/live_app01..........ok 2/0[debug] ***Root::auto User not found, forwarding to /login
    t/live_app01..........ok 15/0[debug] ***Root::auto User not found, forwarding to /login
    t/live_app01..........ok 16/0[debug] ***Root::auto User not found, forwarding to /login
    t/live_app01..........ok                                                     
    t/model_MyAppDB.......ok                                                     
    All tests successful, 2 tests skipped.
    Files=6, Tests=55, 11 wallclock secs ( 4.68 cusr +  4.84 csys =  9.52 CPU)

You should see C<All tests successful>.

=back



=head1 AUTHOR

Kennedy Clark, C<hkclark@gmail.com>

Please report any errors, issues or suggestions to the author.  The
most recent version of the Catalyst Tutorial can be found at
L<http://dev.catalyst.perl.org/repos/Catalyst/trunk/Catalyst-Runtime/lib/Catalyst/Manual/Tutorial/>.

Copyright 2006, Kennedy Clark, under Creative Commons License
(L<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/2.5/>).
