=head1 NAME

Catalyst::Manual::DevelopmentProcess - Administrative structure of the Catalyst Development Process

=head1 Aims of the Catalyst Core Team

The main current goals of the Catalyst core development team continue to
be stability, performance, and a more paced addition of features, with a
focus on extensibility. Extensive improvements to the documentation are
also expected in the short term.

The Catalyst Roadmap at L<http://dev.catalyst.perl.org/roadmap> will
remain as is, and continues to reflect the specific priorities and
schedule for future releases.

=head1 Charter for the Catalyst Core Team

=head2 Intention

The intention of the Catalyst Core Team is to maintain and support the
Catalyst framework, in order for it to be a viable and stable framework
for developing web-based MVC applications. This includes both technical
decisions about the Catalyst core distribution, and public relations
relating to the Catalyst framework as a whole.

The main priority for development is stability for the users of the
framework, while improving usability and extensibility, as well as
improving documentation and ease of deployment.

=head2 Membership

The Catalyst Core Team consists of the developers that have full commit
privileges to the entire Catalyst source tree. 

In addition, the core team may accept members that have non-technical
roles such as marketing, legal, or ecconomic responsibilities.


At the time of conception, the Core Team consists of the following people:

=over 4

=item Andy Grundman

=item Christian Hansen

=item Brian Cassidy

=item Marcus Ramberg

=item Jesse Sheidlower

=item Matt S. Trout

=item Yuval Kogman

=back

New members of the Core Team must be accepted by a 2/3 majority by the
current members.

=head2 Technical Decisions.

Any change to the Catalyst core which can not be conceived as a
correction of an error in the current feature set will need to be
accepted by at least 3 members of the Core Team before it can be
commited to the trunk (which is the basis for CPAN releases). Anyone
with access is at any time free to make a branch to develop a proof of
concept for a feature to be committed to trunk.

=head2 Organizational and Philosophical Decisions.

Any such decision should be decided by majority vote. Thus it should be
a goal of the organization that its membership number should at any time
be an odd number, to render it effective with regards to decision
making. The exceptions to this rule are changes to this charter and
additions to the membership of the Core Team, which require a 2/3
majority.

=head2 CPAN Releases

Planned releases to CPAN should be performed by the release manager, at
the time of writing Marcus Ramberg, or the deputy release manager, at
the time of writing Andy Grundman. In the case of critical error
correction, any member of the Core Team can perform a rescue release.

=head2 Public statements from the Core Team

The Core Team should strive to appear publicly as a group when answering
questions or other correspondence. In cases where this is not possible,
the same order as for CPAN Releases applies.


