=head1 NAME

Catalyst::Manual::Internals - Catalyst Internals

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document provides an overview of the internals of
Catalyst.  As Catalyst is still developing rapidly, details
may become out of date: please treat this as a guide, and
look at the source for the last word.

The coverage is split into initialization and request lifecycle.

=head2 Initialization

Catalyst initializes itself in two stages (I may be wrong in some of
the details here - AF):

=over 4

=item 1

When the Catalyst module is imported in the main application
module it evaluates any options (C<-Debug>, C<-Engine=XXX>)
and loads any specified plugins, making the application module
inherit from the plugin classes. It also sets up a default log
object and ensures that the application module inherits from
C<Catalyst> and from the selected specialized Engine module.

=item 2

When the application module makes the first call to C<< __PACKAGE__->action() >>
(implemented in C<Catalyst::Engine>), Catalyst automatically loads all
components it finds in the C<$class::Controller>, C<$class::C>,
C<$class::Model>, C<$class::M>, C<$class::View> and C<$class::V>
namespaces (using C<Module::Pluggable::Fast>).  A table of actions is built up
and added to on subsequent calls to C<action()>.

=back


=head2 Request Lifecycle

For each request Catalyst builds a I<context> object, which includes
information about the request, and then searches the action table for matching
actions.  

The handling of a request can be divided into three stages: preparation of the
context, processing of the request, and finalization of the response.  These
are the steps of a Catalyst request in detail; every step can be overloaded to
extend Catalyst.

    handler
      prepare
        prepare_request
        prepare_connection
        prepare_headers
        prepare_cookies
        prepare_path
        prepare_action
        prepare_body
        prepare_parameters
        prepare_uploads
      dispatch
      finalize
        finalize_cookies
        finalize_headers
        finalize_body

These steps are normally overloaded from engine classes, and may also be
extended by plugins.  Extending means using multiple inheritance with L<NEXT>.

The specialized engine classes populate the Catalyst request object with
information from the underlying layer (C<Apache::Request> or C<CGI::Simple>)
during the prepare phase, then push the generated response information down to
the underlying layer during the finalize phase.


=head1 AUTHOR

Sebastian Riedel, C<sri@oook.de>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

This program is free software, you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the same terms as Perl itself.
