=head1 ROADMAP

This is a living document, that represents the core team's current plans
for the Catalyst framework. It's liable to change at any time. This document
lives in the the catalyst trunk, currently at 

  http://dev.catalyst.perl.org/repos/Catalyst/trunk/Catalyst/lib/Catalyst/ROADMAP.pod

Make sure you get it from there to ensure you have the latest version.

=head2 5.7x series

Stable relases, no major features planned. Bugfixes for current release
and documentation improvements.

Will be working on developing more ActionClasses, and Reusable chained 
controllers, as well as opinonated highlevel frameworks on top of the 
Catalyst Core.

=head3 5.7.1

=over 4

=item make deployment of Catalyst easier

=over 4

=item Add htaccess files to distro

=item Trim runtime dependencies

=item test dependency graph, make sure everything installs cleanly on different platforms.

=back

=item Add support for configuration profiles to be selected at startup time
through switches / ENV

=item add call method to do a forward with eval case.

=item add go method to do a call while setting action.

=item move all inline pod to bottom of file.

=item update pod coverage tests to detect stubbed pod, ensure real coverage

=back

=head2 5.80000 4. Quarter 2006

Next major planned release.

=over 4

=item  Application / Context Split 

Catalyst needs to be split so that $c refers to the current context, and is a separate thing from the Application class.

=item Extend pluggability of the Catalyst core.

good support for reusable components good support for reusable plugins good 
separation of plugins (some reusable components want different plugins) 
near total engine independence

=item Moose roles instead of NEXT.  

Change the Catalyst core to use Moose for the plugin system as well as
accessors/constructors.

=item Reduce core class data usage.

Refactor everything that doesn't have to be class data into object data

=item Add support for Isotope Engines

This depends on the progress of Isotope

=item Work towards a declarative syntax mode

=back
 
=head2 5.90000 2007

Blue Sky. Will start planning this once we land 5.8 :)

